# PHP 101

Whenever someone is learning PHP, the most common questions are _what is PHP_ and _how does it work_. We're going to look at that as well as some basic concepts that are important to understand when it comes to PHP. These are the foundation of learning how to work with PHP, even in small doses.

In the simplest of terms, PHP is just a programming language that lets you create dynamic pages on a web server. Unlike HTML which the server sends back without doing anything, with PHP, the server has to do some work before it can send anything back to the browser. Being able to do processing on the server is what gives PHP its power.

It's important to note that PHP only sends the _output_ back to the browser, not the actual PHP instructions. That means if you view the source of a PHP page in the browser, you'll only see the final output, not any PHP code. (This can be a stumbling block for people new to PHP since they want to see the PHP code that's being run. In order to see that, you have to have access to the actual PHP file.)

Since PHP is a server-side programming language, it means that you need to have a server running in order to play around with PHP. To do this, you can either use your web server or create a small server on your computer using a variety of different programs (depending on your operating system):

- Windows
	- (AMPPS)[http://www.ampps.com/]
	- (WAMP)[http://www.wampserver.com/en/]
- OS X
	- (MAMP)[http://www.mamp.info/en/index.html]
	- AMPPS is available for OS X, but we recommend sticking with MAMP.
- Linux
	- (XAMPP)[http://www.apachefriends.org/en/xampp-linux.html]

You can download any of the above programs and use their instructions to install and start running the server. Once you've done that, come back here and we'll dive in to getting started with PHP!

Make sure that when you download any of these programs that they have at least PHP 5.4 available for use, otherwise you won't be able to install Nova 3 locally to be able to play around with it.

## Variables

The simplest of concepts when it comes to PHP is _variables_. A variable holds some type of data. That content can be just about anything you want. Generally, a variable will contain text (string), numbers (integer), yes/no (boolean), nothing (null) or a collection of information (arrays and objects). Here are a few things to remember when creating variables in PHP:

- Variables starts with the `$` sign, followed by the name of the variable.
- Variables are assigned using a single equal sign (=). This should not be confused with evaluating if two things are true which uses the double equal sign (==).
- Variable names _must_ start with a letter or underscore.
- Variable names can only contain letters, numbers and an underscore.
- Variable names cannot contain spaces.
- Variable names are case-sensitive (`$x` and `$X` are two different variables).
- PHP statements must end with a semicolon (;).

<pre>// Putting text into a variable
$text = 'A string of text';

// Putting a number into a variable
$number = 15;

// Putting a yes (true) or no (false) value into a variable
$yesNo = true;

// Putting an array into a variable
$array = ['one', 'two', 'three'];</pre>

## Conditional Statements

Conditional statements, or logic, allow you to make decisions as your code is running. The most basic form of conditional statements is the if/else statement.

<pre>if ($number == 15)
{
	echo 'The number is 15';
}
else
{
	echo 'The number is not 15';
}</pre>

You aren't limited to just if/else, you can also use if/elseif/else as well.

<pre>$result = 70;

if ($result >= 75)
{ 
    echo "Passed: Grade A";
}
elseif ($result >= 60)
{
    echo "Passed: Grade B";
} 
elseif ($result >= 45)
{
    echo "Passed: Grade C";
}
else
{
    echo "Failed";
}</pre>

### Ternary Operators

Sometimes, when you need to do a simple if/else statement, it can be easier to use a ternary operator. The result is the same but with less code.

<pre>$result = 70;

$passed = ($result >= 45) ? "Passed" : "Failed";

echo $passed;

// Would produce:
Passed</pre>

### Comparison Operators

As seen in the examples above, there are several ways to compare data. Here are some of the most common:

<pre>($result == 70)
// Result equals 70

($result != 70)
// Result does not equal 70

($result > 70)
// Result is greater than 70

($result < 70)
// Result is less than 70

($result >= 70)
// Result is greater than or equal to 70

($result <= 70)
// Result is less than or equal to 70</pre>

## Arrays

Arrays are an incredibly convenient and powerful way to store and organize data quickly and efficiently. An array is a key-value pair. The value can be any type of data, even other arrays. You can access the individual elements of an array by reference their index within the array.

<pre>$dwarves = [
	0 => 'Bashful',
	1 => 'Doc',
	2 => 'Dopey',
	3 => 'Grumpy',
	4 => 'Happy',
	5 => 'Sleepy',
	6 => 'Sneezy',
];

echo $dwarves[3];

// Would produce:
Grumpy</pre>

The above array is known as an indexed array. We could also eliminate specifically using the indices and it would work the same. It is also possible to use strings as the indices in an array. Commonly referred to as associative arrays, they can often help organize data better.

<pre>$dwarves = [
	'Bashful' => 'Scotty Mattraw',
	'Doc' => 'Roy Atwell',
	'Dopey' => 'Eddie Collins',
	'Grumpy' => 'Pinto Colvig',
	'Happy' => 'Otis Harlan',
	'Sleepy' => 'Pinto Colvig',
	'Sneezy' => 'Billy Gilbert',
];

echo $dwarves['Grumpy'];

// Would produce:
Pinto Colvig</pre>

## Looping

Sometime it's necessary to repeat the same block of code a given number of times, or until a certain condition is met. This is accomplished by using _loops_. PHP has two major groups of looping statements: `for` and `while`.

### while

While loops execute a block of code _if_ and _as long_ as a specified condition evaluates to true. If the condition becomes false, the statements within the loop stop executing.

<pre>$i=0;

while ($i <= 5)
{
   echo "The number is ".$i;
   $i++;
}

// Would produce:
The number is 0
The number is 1
The number is 2
The number is 3
The number is 4
The number is 5</pre>

### for

For loops are used when you know how many times you want to execute a statement or a list of statements. For this reason, `for` loops are known as definite loops.

<pre>for ($i=0; $i <= 5; $i++) 
{
   echo "The number is ".$i;
}

// Would produce:
The number is 0
The number is 1
The number is 2
The number is 3
The number is 4
The number is 5</pre>

### foreach

Arrays are actually _iterable_ items, which means you can step through each record of the set with a loop.

<pre>$array['one', 'two', 'three', 'four', 'five'];

foreach ($array as $key => $value)
{
	echo $key.' - '.$value;
}

// Would produce:
0 - one
1 - two
2 - three
3 - four
4 - five</pre>

As you'll remember from talking about arrays, arrays as a key-value pair, so every value has an index. This can be a number or a string. When using a `foreach` loop, you don't have to use the key, you can just pull the value.

<pre>$array['one', 'two', 'three', 'four', 'five'];

foreach ($array as $value)
{
	echo $value;
}

// Would produce:
one
two
three
four
five</pre>

These are very simple examples, but you can see that looping through an array of telling code to execute a certain number of times can create some powerful tools for a developer to use.

## Additional Topics

There are a few additional topics you may want to look in to further. With the basics under your belt, you should be able to find plenty of information on Google for these topics:

- Combining multiple strings
- Basic arithmetic with number variables
- Switch statements
- Adding items to arrays and objects